How to feel confident without feeling like you're faking it.

I have wrestled with the idea of confidence for a very long time. For a while, I tried to follow that "it girl," fake-it-till-you-make-it mentality. But there was always this dichotomy between confidence as a projection to the outside world and how I was feeling on the inside. Performance versus a felt experience. I finally feel like I've reached a point where I'm starting to feel the alignment between the outside and the inside.

The biggest misconception about confidence is that it lives in the absence of doubt. I think the idea of belief is overrated and the idea of self-doubt is demonized. In order to be confident, you are told you need to have this 100% all natural, organic, gluten-free belief in this thing, that thing, the next thing, and everything. That's a very exhausting way to live your life if you're constantly hung up on having belief 24/7.

Don't get me wrong, belief matters, but not at the expense of driving yourself crazy. At the end of the day, we are human beings. We are supposed to feel a whole spectrum of things. We are not AI. We're not robots. Robots probably don't have any self-doubt. AI probably doesn't have any self-doubt either.

Here's what confidence feels more like now. Not, "I am confident. I believe 100% this thing will happen." It's, "I am confident that I'm going to be okay no matter what happens. I am confident that I can handle whatever comes at me." The key words are "no matter what."

I think a lot of us have conditional confidence. I'll feel confident if this works out. I'll feel confident if I reach this milestone. I'll feel confident if this person chooses me. You're still outsourcing your confidence to things on the outside when it should be living within you. That also means anytime something doesn't go to plan, your confidence collapses with it.

Real, true, genuine confidence should be something that is not swayed by everything going on around you.

So how do you get to that feeling? It's with knowing yourself. I know everyone says this, but I don't mean it in a journal-entry way, like what are your favorite things or what are your hobbies? I mean taking stock of your lived experiences and owning that. Both the good and the bad, especially the bad. How you got to where you are today. Knowing who the person is that got you to where you are today.

Being able to look back and think, "Oh, wow. I didn't think I was going to get through that, but I did. And here we are." You really start to own your own story. The magical thing that happens is you stop needing other people's validation.

That's another thing we talk about a lot, right? But how do you do that? It's not about trying harder to stop caring about what other people are saying. It's about trying harder to be more secure in yourself.

If you really think about what is happening when you're bending to or being influenced so much by other people's opinions and judgments, it's effectively the same as living your life through someone else's eyes. Literally living someone else's story, absorbing other people's beliefs and perceptions and their own brain algorithm. That is why you feel stuck. That is why you feel misaligned.

I saw something recently that really struck me. It's kind of random, but it was this interview with Dolly Parton. She was this really famous singer in the 70s and the 80s. She was known for having this crazy persona, big blonde hair, crazy outfits, and makeup. Because of that, people would have these perceptions or misperceptions about who she is as a person. Oftentimes they're very negative, but she is actually the sweetest, the kindest, and one of the people in the entertainment industry who has quietly done the most philanthropy.

In the interview she said, and this is paraphrased by the way, "I can afford," the key word being afford, "to do all this stuff with my hair and my makeup and all this crazy stuff with my outfits because I know who I am. I am sure of who I am and I like who I am on the inside."

The felt experience of confidence really starts with asking yourself: Do you know who you are? Are you sure of who you are? And do you like who you are? The relationship she has built with herself is so strong on the inside that nothing on the outside can shake that.

How do you build that relationship with yourself? You build trust with yourself. Trust is not something that you think your way into. It's built by building evidence that you can trust yourself doing the things that you say you're going to do. It's by keeping the promises that you make to yourself.

Every time you do the things that you say you're going to do, you trust yourself more. You believe in yourself more. The relationship that you have with yourself is stronger. You build a portfolio of evidence for you to trust yourself. Next time something happens, you can pull out this portfolio and show it to yourself.

It does become kind of a chicken-and-egg problem, but you build it brick by brick by taking action over and over again before you feel ready. Eventually, you will feel ready. It's not by sitting there and saying affirmations to yourself 24/7, although that can help.

Speaking honestly, the moments where I feel most confident about myself are actually not the moments where I have just achieved something or reached a milestone in my life. It's actually right after I've done the reps in something over and over again, or experienced something over and over again, or mentally processed something over and over again, and I think, "Wow, I think I know how to handle this now."

If you don't feel like you have confidence right now, and everyone on the internet is telling you to be more confident in yourself and you just don't know how to do that, it is okay. Every time you take the action, more confidence pixie dust, whatever you want to call it, gets added into your jar of confidence. That's kind of how I like to think about it.

Everything happens in the here and now. By waiting for confidence to come to you before you take action, you're effectively pushing whatever reality you want further into the future. But if you take the action now as the version of you who would be doing those things, you are collapsing your reality. That is what collapsing reality really means in the most simple and practical way of speaking.

You might be saying, "Well, isn't that just faking it till you make it? Aren't you contradicting yourself?" For me, there is a very distinct difference between the fake-it-till-you-make-it mentality and the felt experience of what I was just talking about.

Faking it till you make it feels like you're pretending to be someone. You're putting on an act, and inside you know it's an act, but you're trying to finagle your way through it. What I'm describing is more like being blatantly honest with yourself about how you feel. I do feel scared. I do feel not sure of myself while doing this, but I'm still going to do it. That, I think, is a healthier way of living life.

For some people, the fake-it-till-you-make-it mindset does work. If that's the case for you, amazing. Keep doing that. But I think there is something to be said about being very honest with your emotions and very true to what you're feeling as you're going through life and moving through society.

I just want you guys all to be confident little nuggets. Okay, I will see you in the next one.
